Highly-Integrated 16-channel Silicon-Photonics Optical Engine Enabling PAM6 Transmission with BER 1 Ciena, NJ, USA, thle@ciena.com 
Abstract: We demonstrate 53-GBaud PAM6 transmission with an aggregate data rate exceeding 2 Tb/s using a highly-integrated, high-density, low-power 16-channel SiPh optical engine, achieving a raw BER 17 PAM6 symbols offline following a QAM32 mapping approach [8]. Digital pre-emphasis with a 7-tap FFE typical of today's SerDes macros (5 dB maximum pre-emphasis) was performed to partially compensate for the electrical channel loss. The generated signal was then uploaded to the memory of a DAC running at 106.25 GS/s. No pulse shaping was used, as would be typical for symbol-rate sampled high-speed SerDes. To emulate a channel loss up to 16 dB, an RF loss-board was added between the DAC and the OE evaluation board (EVB). We used an ELSFP with 4 industry-standard 21-dBm DFB lasers at 1310 nm to provide optical power to 16 channels of OE simultaneously using a 1:4 split on each ELS fiber. The optical channel under test (CUT) is also connected to an adjustable reflection emulator (ARE), including a VOA, polarization controller, couplers, 5 m of SMF (for decorrelation) and an optical isolator, to emulate the impact of multipath interference (MPI). The signal with MPI is launched into 1 km of SMF. The received optical signal is fed to a RX under test. The RX output is differentially detected by a 2-channel 256 GS/s RTO for offline processing. Offline processing emulates functions implemented on a state-of-the-art symbol-rate sampling SerDes: i ) signal conditioning and filtering (emulating the analog SerDes front-end); ii ) timing recovery; iii ) symbol-spaced equalization (EQ); iv ) direct BER counting (for BER > 2e-7) or BER estimation based on the received signal histogram (for BER 4 dB. Fig. 3(c) depicts the BER measurements for all 16 channels after 1 km of SMF (- 53 dB MPI), showing that a record low BER below 1E-9 for >100 Gb/s PAM6 was achieved for all 16 channels with FFE-65 and DFE-1, and even better BERs are expected with MLSE.
Next, we investigate the impact of bandwidth limitation and electrical channel loss on the sensitivity. Fig. 4(a) shows the spectra of received signals for 7 dB and 16 dB of
Fig. 5 – Impact of MPI on the BER for Ch15 with FFE-65 + DFE-1. The electrical channel loss is ~ 7 dB.
electrical channel loss with and without driver peaking. With 7 dB of channel loss, the 6-dB E/O/E bandwidth of the system is ~ 20 GHz; in the case of 16 dB of channel loss it drops below 8 GHz, i.e., 15% of the symbol rate. The OE is designed for flexible implementation with various channel loss cases with an adjustable CTLE. One can see in Fig. 4(a) that by choosing a proper CTLE peaking (PKC = 15), 16 dB of electrical channel loss (Tx channel), can be compensated for. The impact of system bandwidth limitations is depicted in Fig. 4(b) for the case of 16 dB channel loss w/o compensation. A BER -1 dBm. This result indicates high performance and low nonlinearity of the driver CTLE, even in the context of PAM6 transmission.
Finally, we study the impact of MPI on the performance of our PAM6 signals, which is depicted in Fig. 5 for Ch15 in a B2B case with FFE-65 and DFE-1. For MPI