Coexistence demonstration of reflective OFDR sensing and commercial transceivers in a submarine testbed
R. Ryf(1), N. K. Fontaine(1), S. Bidkar(1), J. Simsarian(1), M. H. Idjadi(1), L. Dallachiesa(1) , D. T. Neilson(1) and M. Mazur(1)
(1) Nokia Bell Labs, 600 Mountain Ave., Murray Hill, NJ 07974, USA roland.ryf@nokia-bell-labs.com 
Abstract: We investigate the performance and coexistence of an optical frequency domain reflectometer (OFDR) based high-resolution reflective sensing prototype in conjunction with commercial transponders in a dryland submarine testbed link. © 2025 The Author(s)
1. Introduction
Distributed acoustic sensing (DAS) has been the workhorse for distributed fiber sensing over the last two decades, but in the context of submarine cables the technology was limited to sensing in the first and last span of submarine cables only. We recently overcame that limitation by using a long reach OFDR prototype, making the entire ocean accessible for long scale DAS equivalent sensing measurements \[1[–6\]](#page-2-1).
In this work we investigate the coexistence of our long reach OFDR sensing prototype in conjunction with commercial transceivers, measured in a dry-land submarine testbed representative of a typical submarine system including high loss loop back as commonly found in currently deployed submarine cables. In particular, we study the sensitivity of the OFDR system as function of the in band bandwidth allocated for the sensing measurements, and we also monitor the performance of the transceivers in the various configurations. The work shows that OFDR based reflective measurements have a negligible impact on the neighboring communication channels, while providing high quality intensity and DAS data for all spans under measurement.
2. Subsea dry-land testbed
The testbed consists of 4 bidirectional standard single-mode spans with a 40-km length each and a loss of 0.20 dB/km, and chromatic dispersion of 18 ps/nm/km. We used 10 erbium doped amplifiers (EDFAs) configured as 5 bidirectional amplifiers to launch and terminate the multi-span arrangement. The details of the bidirectional
Fig. 1: Configuration of dryland subsea testbed, consisting of four 40-km repeater spans with 90/10 loop back couplers. Wavelength selective switches (WSS) are used to combine transmission channels, OFDR, and ASE loading.
amplifier setup is shown in Fig. 1, in particular the arrangement also includes the high-loss loopback (HLL) coupler functionality, that are present in most subsea cables for diagnostic and debugging purposes. In our setup the HLL functionality is implemented by a pair of 10:90 couplers that couples the output after the amplifier of one direction with the output of the amplifier in the opposite direction, resulting in a coupling efficiency of -20 dB for the Rayleigh back scattered light from the previous span into the following span in opposite direction (see Fig. 1\).
3. Channel plan for coexistence testing
The test signal consists of a 4-THz wide noise signal generated by an amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) source subsequently flattened by using a wavelength selective switch (WSS). A second WSS is used to block the noise loading signal and add the transceiver channels and the OFDR Tx signal using different channel configurations. When adding the transceiver and the OFDR signals we made sure to keep the total launch power into the cable the same as the initial uncarved noise loading profile, similarly as channels are added in operational subsea systems. As data channels we used 4 commercially available transceivers operating at 200 Gb/s, using a 16QAM modulation format, and we monitoring the pre forward-error correction (pre-FEC) bit-error rate (BER) every 4-s time intervals over 10 min for each measurement. The data channels were arranged in two pairs spaced at 50 GHz, next to each side of the OFDR signal, and we changed the bandwidth reserved for the OFDR between 50 GHz to 1000 GHz. The total launch power into the span was 15 dBm, the launch power of the data channel was -4 dB for each channel, and the launch power (PW) of the OFDR was adjusted according to the following table:
 OFDR BW (GHz) 50 100 200 500 1000 
 --------------- ---- ----- ----- ----- ------ 
 OFDR PW (dBm) -4 -1 2 6 9 
Table 1: Test configurations showing the allocated bandwidth BW and launch power PW into the span for the OFDR test signal
In the reverse direction, we also injected the signals from the 4 transceivers to simulate the impact of telecom channels into the received OFDR Rx signal, but the pre-FEC BER was only measured in the forward direction, where the signals are copropagating with the stronger OFDR Tx signal.
Fig. 2: a) Optical spectrum measured after each span for the forward direction for a OFDR bandwidth of 50 GHz, measured with a high resolution optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) with a resolution bandwidth of 1.75 GHz. b) Optical spectra for each configuration according to Tab. 1, offset by 25 dB in the y axis for clarity.
We first characterized the performance of the testbed by scanning the launch power into the spans from 6 to 20 dBm (see fig.4.a). The maximum performance is obtained around 17 dBm launch power, and we performed our investigation at a slightly lower power of 15 dBm. For each configuration we measure the pre-FEC BER, the spectra of the transmitted signals for all spans and the OFDR sensing data.
Fig. 3: a) Intensity of back-scattered sensing signals reported for all 4 spans for the configurations from Table 1, measured from a single 67-ms acquisition window. b) DAS data acquired over a 1 min measurement. c) Measured phase-power densities spectra for one 50 m DAS channel for the beginning and end of each span at spacings from 50 GHz to 1000 GHz, where the phase plots correspond to slices along the colored vertical lines from b).
Fig. 4: a) Q 2 calculated based on Averaged pre-FEC BER measured over 10 min as function of the total launch power into the spans for all transceivers under test . b) Q 2 penalty introduced by the OFDR as function of the OFDR band-width configuration as reported in Table 1.
The OFDR prototype is implemented by leveraging telecom components and real-time digital signal processing using a combination of FPGAs and GPUs to provide a scalable platform that can rapidly be scaled to a large number of cables. Further implementation details are provided in \[5, [6\]](#page-2-1). Each system used chirped pulse interrogation with 250 MHz bandwidth, therefore only occupying a small fraction of the allocated bandwidth. The system was configured using a 67 ms chirp period, corresponding to about 6700 km maximum cable distance, to emulate trans-Atlantic submarine links and operated with a spatial resolution of 50 m. Similar to [\[6\]](#page-2-1), we used a cavity-stabilized laser as our source.
4. Results
The results of the OFDR performance and the impact on the co-propagating transceivers is shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4.b, respectively. The acoustic noise observed dominated any laser noise, resulting in a common acoustic noise levels for all spools inside the lab. The power over the noise floor at the end of each span averaged 0.5, 2.5, 4, 6, and 9 dB for 50, 100, 200, 500 and 1000 GHz, respectively. Comparing the shape for 50 GHz and 1000 GHz, we observe that the slope, originating from the Rayleigh backscattering, is flattening towards the end of each span, originating from limited SNR over the 67 ms measurement window. In contrast, the trace follows a triangular shape for both 500 and 10000 GHz, indicating that the measurement is not SNR limited. At the smallest considered bandwidth allocation for inband sensing of 50 GHz, we can clearly resolve the Rayleigh backscattering of all the spans until the end of each span. The end of span sensitivity can be significantly increased by assigning a wider sensing slots. While we do not observe any impact from the 4 commercial transceivers on the OFDR channel, we can notice a performance degradation induced by the OFDR signals on the transponder as shown in Fig. 4 b. The effect is negligible for a 50 GHz sensing channel, but can become noticeable (up to 1 dB) for larger sensing bandwidth of up to 1 THz. The results obtained in our testbed provide a good proof of principle for the coexistence of reflective sensing next to telecom channels, but the results cannot easily be generalized to existing subsea cables, as a many cable design parameters like supported bandwidth, cable length, coupling ratio of the HLLs, fiber loss, fiber effective area, and Rayleigh backscattering coefficient, all have an impact on the sensing performance and nonlinear interactions between the sensing and telecom channels. However, we are confident that the observed results are consistent with the performance we previously observed in several recent field trials \[5, [7\]](#page-2-4).
5. Conclusion
We demonstrate that real-time in-band reflective fiber sensing is possible in multispan subsea cables in the presence of live transceivers, and the performance impact is almost negligible for an allocated 50-GHz wide sensing channel. Higher sensing performance is possible by allocating more bandwidth to the OFDR signal resulting in a relatively small penalty observed by the transceivers.
References
1. B. M. Howe et al , "SMART Cables for Observing the Global Ocean: Science and Implementation", Front. in. Marine Science, 2019.
2. Z. Zhan et al , "Optical polarization–based seismic and water...", Science, vol. 371, no. 6532, pp. 931–936, 2021.
3. G. Marra et al , "Optical interferometry–based array of seafloor environmental sensors...", Science 376 (6595), 2022.
4. M. Mazur et al , "Global Seismic Monitoring using Operational Subsea Cable, Proc. ECOC paper Th3B.7, 2024.
5. M. Mazur et al , "Continuous Distributed Phase and Polarization Monitoring of Trans-Atlantic...", Proc. OFC paper Tu3J.1, 2024.
6. M. Mazur et al , "Submarine Cable Deep-Ocean Observation of Mega-Thrust Earthquake and Tsunami...", Proc. ECOC paper, 2025.
7. M. Mazur et al , "Real-Time In-Line Coherent Distributed Sensing over a Legacy Submarine Cable,", Proc. OFC paper Th4B.8, 2024.