Integrated Glass Waveguide Substrate with Surface Coupled Photonic Chips for Massive Scaling of CPO
Lars Brusberg(1), Seong-ho Seok(2), Tim Grygiel(1), BoKyung Kong(2), Aramais R. Zakharian(3), Betsy J. Johnson(3), Janderson R. Rodrigues(3), Chad C. Terwilliger(3), Lucas W. Yeary(3) , Jesus A. Cumana Morales(1), Marisol M. Gonzalez(1)
(1) Corning Optical Communication GmbH & Co. KG, Walter-Nernst-Str. 5, 12489, Berlin, Germany (2) Corning Technology Center Korea, 30 Manjeondang-Gil, Asan, Korea (3) Corning Research and Development Corporation, One Riverfront Plaza, 14831, Corning, NY, USA brusbergl@corning.com
Abstract: Widescale CPO adoption relies on advanced glass substrates with embedded waveguides and electrical interconnects, enabling scalable silicon photonics assembly through sub-micron alignment, evanescent coupling, and gold bumps, achieving 2 dB fiber-to-chip loss in initial demonstrations.
1. Introduction
The accelerating adoption of digital technologies, driven in part by the explosive growth of artificial intelligence (AI), has created an urgent need for higher bandwidth, lower power consumption, and an increasing number of interconnects in data centers [1]. One emerging solution to meet these demands is co-packaged optics (CPO), a cutting-edge approach to build the next generation of network switches and graphics processing units (GPU) by moving optics inside the electronic packages to minimize the length of the electrical interconnect. Silicon photonics has become a key enabler of CPO, thanks to its compatibility with scalable CMOS manufacturing, assembly, and testing processes. A critical technical challenge lies in the optical interconnect between single-mode fiber arrays and the assembly of silicon photonics-based photonic integrated circuits (PIC). Techniques such as butt coupling, tapered waveguides, grating coupling, mode-expansion structures, and evanescent coupling each offer unique benefits and limitations, depending on the application [2]. It is essential to develop solutions based on electronic packaging technologies in combination with detachable optical fiber connections for widespread adoption and massive scaling of CPO supporting the growth of AI computer clusters. Currently, the industry focuses on expanded beam free-space coupling for the optical PIC interface to support flip-chip electrical assembly prior to connecting with optical fiber cables. Micro-optics are attached as additional layers using wafer-level processing [3] or attached as separate components [4]. A combined assembly process for PICs with electrical and optical ports on the same surface requires fine-pitch electrical substrates with integrated waveguides. Fig. 1a shows schematically a glass substrate with 16 PICs located on four sides of the ASIC with electrical line lengths of <13 mm. Each PIC can be placed in less than five minutes, passively aligned by a combination of vision and mechanical features. The optical fiber connector is mechanically decoupled at the edge of the glass substrate [5].
Fig. 1. Integrated glass waveguide substrate for CPO (a) with sixteen PICs surrounding the application specific integrated circuit (ASIC), (b) schematical cross-section of glass substrate with optical interface between PIC and ion-exchange (IOX) glass waveguides, and (c) flip-chip assembly of PIC with e/o interface made of evanescent coupled waveguides with optical adhesive layer and gold brbumps inside an etched cavity.
The glass substrate has embedded waveguides close to the surface, made by an ion-exchange (IOX) process, and electrical interconnects fabricated by a thin-film process inside an etched cavity, as shown in Fig. 1b. The coupling of IOX waveguides with SiN photonic integrated circuits (PICs) was demonstrated using evanescent coupling via flip-chip bonding with sub-micron alignment and an index-matching optical adhesive, achieving broadband low
coupling losses (<1.5 dB) for both polarizations [5]. For the first time, a PIC is directly bonded to a glass waveguide substrate using state-of-the-art electrical bumps (gold stud bumps) that are compressed inside the cavity between the PIC and glass during the assembly process (Fig. 1c), demonstrating a scalable single-assembly method for connecting optical and electrical ports.
2. Design for Co-packaged Optics
A surface coupler is designed to transfer light efficiently between an IOX and SiN waveguides placed in proximity over a length of up to 3 mm using Eigenmode expansion (EME) simulation (Fig. 2a). The SiN waveguide is 400 nm thick and 800 nm wide, tapered to 300 nm. The coupling efficiency depends on the taper length and adhesive layer thickness (Fig. 2b), with losses below 1 dB achievable using 2-3 mm long SiN tapers, which tolerate lateral misalignments of up to 3-4 µm, within the accuracy of precision flip-chip bonder tools. A test vehicle was designed based on electrical interconnect requirements extrapolated from the OIF implementation agreement for a 3.2 Tb/s CPO module [6]. The SiN PIC layout (Fig. 2c) has dimensions of 10 mm × 5 mm with 25 rows along the 5 mm chip edge and 800 electrical bonding pads of 50 µm rectangular size on a 180 µm pitch. Bare spaces were created in the electrical footprint to provide two pedestals (Ø = 500 µm) as additional mechanical stops to the glass surface for leveling the PIC during assembly. The glass interposer (Fig. 2c) has dimensions of 14.5 mm × 10 mm and includes an array of 16 straight waveguides, alignment fiducials in the area of the optical I/Os, and electrical bonding pads connected in nine electrical daisy chain test loops with probing pads inside the 22 µm etched cavity (8 mm × 8 mm) for the electrical I/Os.
Fig. 2. Test vehicle consisting of: (a) an evanescent coupler for coupling the IOX waveguide mode to the SiN mode over a length of up to 3 mm; (b) coupling loss as a function of taper length and adhesive thickness; (c) the layout of the SiN chip and glass substrate, both with optical and electrical I/Os; and (d) the fabricated glass substrate with an integrated array of 16 waveguides and electrical pads inside the 22 µm deep cavity.
The glass substrate is manufactured at the wafer or panel level in a process sequence that consists of two-step thermal silver IOX waveguide integration, cavity etching, through-glass via (TGV) formation, and deposition of 5 µm electrical copper lines and pads, followed by the formation of under-bump metallization (UBM) using nickel and gold. The optical connector receptacle can be assembled to the laser-singulated end facets of the glass substrate but was not required for this work. Glass test vehicles (Fig. 2d) were fabricated on 150 mm wafers with a thickness of 0.7 mm. The measured propagation loss of the waveguides is <0.1 dB/cm. The optical I/O area for this sample is 4 mm × 3 mm. The waveguide density could be significantly increased by using a 50 µm waveguide pitch, with a total of 80 waveguides supporting a bandwidth density of 8 Tb/s (400G per waveguide). Low-loss optical fan-outs provide the required pitch for the fiber array.
3. PIC Assembly and Testing
The PIC was fabricated on a multi-project wafer. Au stud-bumping was selected due to the chip-level process and the thin-film aluminum pad metallization. A pick-and-place bonder aligned the PIC and glass substrate using crossfiducials. After alignment, the PIC was thermo-compression bonded to the glass substrate with an optimized thermal profile. The entire sequence was completed in less than five minutes. Finally, optical adhesive was dispensed to fill the gap between the PIC and the glass. Due to the high viscosity of the adhesive, the entire area was filled, providing mechanical protection. The assembly was inspected under a microscope through the glass (Fig. 3a), showing uniform filling of the adhesive with no overflow, and from the backside of the PIC (Fig. 3b). One of the crossfiducials used for alignment is shown in Fig. 3c, together with a Vernier pattern to assess the lateral offset, which was less than 1 µm. The thermal stability of the waveguides was demonstrated by coupling green laser light into the edge of the sample (Fig. 3d) and confirmed through refractive index measurements of the waveguide cross-section. The optical loss was measured to be similar for TE and TM modes, in the range of 3-4 dB for the C-band, with a minimum loss of 2 dB at 1480 nm for this device (Fig. 3e). The best result was demonstrated for an optical assembly (without cavity and electrical I/Os), achieving a loss of <1.5 dB for the C-band and minimum loss <1 dB (Fig. 3f). The electrical daisy chains were measured to confirm electrical functionality. The average resistance of a daisy chain with 96 bumps was measured to be ~57 Ω, which is within the calculated range of 41 Ω to 62 Ω based on the metallization process tolerances of individual layers.
Fig. 3. PIC on glass substrate with optical and electrical I/Os: (a) through-glass view showing eight optical SiN loops and all electrical bonding pads connected via daisy-chain; (b) backside of the PIC partially mounted on top of the 8 mm × 8 mm etched cavity; (c) fiducials for precision alignment during the assembly process; (d) laser-coupled light to the IOX waveguide; (e) measured loss of electro-optical assembly; and (f) measured loss of optical assembly.
4. Summary
The accelerating adoption of digital technologies, particularly AI, has driven the need for co-packaged optics (CPO) to address higher bandwidth, lower power consumption, and increased interconnect demands in data centers. A glass substrate with integrated waveguides and electrical interconnects has demonstrated a scalable assembly of silicon photonics-based PICs using sub-micron alignment, evanescent coupling, and gold stud bumps, achieving low optical coupling losses (<2 dB in initial demonstration) for broadband operation and thermal stability, while supporting bandwidth densities of up to 8 Tb/s. Further reduction of the optical coupling loss is possible through an improved angular alignment control.
5. References
[1] S. Priyadarshi. "Advancing AI Scalability and Performance with Optical Interconnects". IEEE Communications Magazine. Jul 28, 2025.
[2] Tan, M., et al. "Co-packaged Optics (CPO): Status, Challenges, and Solutions". Front. Optoelectron. 16, 1 (2023).
[3] M. F. Chen et al., "Optical and Electrical Characterization of a Compact Universal Photonic Engine," IEEE 75th ECTC, 2025, pp. 54-58.
[4] S. Kannan et al., "High Density Integration of Silicon Photonic Chiplets for 51.2T Co-packaged Optics," IEEE 74th ECTC, 2024, pp. 81-84.
[5] L. Brusberg et al., "Glass Platform for Co-Packaged Optics," IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, Vol 29, No 3, 2023.
[6] Optical Internetworking Forum, online: https://www.oiforum.com/wp-content/uploads/OIF-Co-Packaging-3.2T-Module-01.0.pdf